**California State Fisheries Stakeholder Engagement User Manual**

Center for Ocean Solutions and Kearns & West

<span id="_Toc425172568" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc307053358" class="anchor"></span></span>*I. Introduction*
===============================================================================================================

<span id="_Toc425172569" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc307053359" class="anchor"></span></span>How to Use this Manual
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Robust stakeholder engagement is essential for the sustainable
management of fisheries throughout California. Given the multitude and
diversity of stakeholders involved, engagement with fishermen and other
groups affected by fisheries management can be challenging. Fortunately,
many different stakeholder engagement strategies exist to enable
interaction between fisheries managers and stakeholders. Although these
strategies may not be able to address all of the challenges in fisheries
management, they can be designed to allow a free flow of information
between fisheries stakeholders and managers, assisting in the
decision-making process and creating more robust, long-lasting solutions
to management issues.

This project has been informed by interviews with stakeholder engagement
experts in fishery management agencies across the United States and with
fishery stakeholders in California. The key purpose of the interviews
was to assess and distill how various outreach strategies can be applied
to improve fishery management decision-making.

This User Manual is an interim document that describes a step-by-step
process by which fisheries managers and other users can identify, adapt,
and implement appropriate and effective fisheries engagement approaches
within a variety of management contexts. Ultimately, the content
presented here will be integrated into an online decision support tool
to help users easily identify engagement strategies that are uniquely
suited to their needs. A key purpose of this User Manual and the
associated decision support tool is to facilitate and promote
stakeholder engagement that sets better expectations and creates more
buy-in from the stakeholders who participate.

This User Manual has three sections:

-   **Section I** introduces the user to the document and shares
    information on how to use the manual, why stakeholder engagement is
    important, key principles underlying stakeholder engagement,
    relevant statutory requirements, and metrics for evaluating
    stakeholder engagement.

-   **Section II** will lead the user through the process of scoping
    engagement needs and selecting the appropriate engagement strategy
    or strategies to meet those needs. This process will eventually be
    simplified and streamlined through an online decision support tool.

-   **Section III** provides the user with a compendium of each
    engagement strategy with definitions, key considerations for
    implementation (e.g., timing, resource and skill requirements, keys
    to success), and ways for evaluating strategy effectiveness.

Before proceeding, it’s important to note that fisheries management is
an ever-changing field. Although this manual provides a straightforward
process for selecting and implementing an appropriate strategy, it
should also be noted that continually adapting engagement strategies to
fit changing management contexts is important for long-term success. For
this reason, this manual’s content and companion online decision support
tool should be periodically updated to respond to major changes in the
socio-ecological, economic, political, or institutional landscape of
fisheries management.

Additionally, it is important to recognize that there may never be a
perfect stakeholder engagement strategy for every scenario: there will
always be trade-offs. The challenge for the user is to select the most
appropriate strategy or strategies given specific engagement goals,
process timing, stakeholder audiences, and other constraints (e.g.,
staff and financial resources, legal).

<span id="_Toc425172570" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc307053360" class="anchor"></span></span>Why Stakeholder Engagement is Important
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Stakeholder engagement with fishery stakeholders is critical for the
long-term success of any management regime. Assessments conducted in
2014 show that a significant majority of stakeholders support and rely
on robust engagement by regulators to ensure fisheries remain healthy
and sustainable into the future. Good engagement is important to ensure
stakeholders with relevant, local knowledge, and who are most directly
affected by regulatory decisions, are provided the opportunity to be
involved in the development of management options, science, and data
collection for their fisheries. By utilizing the engagement principles
below, regulators and stakeholders can build trust, create resilient
relationships, and increase “buy-in” for and ultimately compliance with
fisheries management decisions. This applies to engagement prior to,
during, and following a regulatory process, although ensuring effective
stakeholder engagement prior to regulatory processes is especially
important.

<span id="_Toc425172571" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc307053361" class="anchor"></span></span>Key Stakeholder Engagement Principles and Guidance for Implementing in Practice
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Employing the key process principles of stakeholder engagement is
critical in improving decision-making outcomes in any fishery context.
This User Manual distills five overarching process principles that
should be integrated into the use of each engagement strategy. These
principles will ultimately be presented *first* when users open the
online decision support tool.

Resource managers and stakeholders should draw on these key principles
and best practices to inform both the selection and implementation of an
effective stakeholder engagement strategy. Table 1 below defines each
principle and presents key process guidance for implementing the
principles in practice. Stakeholder engagement is also not a passive
experience for the stakeholder. Consistent commitment and engagement
from all parties is necessary to accomplish meaningful engagement and to
achieve desired management outcomes.

**Tribal Consultation**

As Indian Tribes are separate government entities, any fisheries
management decision that might influence Indian tribes and tribal
communities should follow the guidance detailed in the California
Natural Resources Agency Tribal Consultation Policy to ensure effective
government-to-government consultation during the process. If tribal
consultation is needed, agency users should contact their agency’s
tribal liaison.

Table 1. Five Key Stakeholder Engagement Principles and Implementation
Guidance

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Principle**            **Description**                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   **Why Implement?**                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                **Guidance to Implement in Practice**
  ------------------------ --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Engage early and Often   Engaging stakeholders early and often allows managers to identify the boundaries of stakeholder values and preferences around management issues and ensure that management alternatives are, and remain, in the public interest.                                                                                                  Early public involvement can reduce delays in the approval process and the likelihood of issues becoming politicized. Engaging stakeholders early can also nurture trust, expand management options, improve communication, improve process efficiency, enable conflict management, and increase representation.                                                                                  -   Involve stakeholders in defining the management problem; decision-making reflects the interests and concerns of stakeholders at that time.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               -   Involve stakeholders before management alternatives are identified and solidified to ensure all viable options are on the table
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               -   Use consistent mechanisms for updating and engaging stakeholders in the decision-making process (e.g., website is updated bimonthly).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               -   Employ engagement strategies over a time frame during which stakeholders can feasibly influence the management decision (e.g., stakeholders are contacted 1-2 months ahead of an engagement opportunity that will inform decision-making; stakeholders are engaged *before* managers use their best judgment about the decision).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

  Set Clear Goals          Setting goals ensures managers and stakeholders alike are working towards a common endpoint.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Clear goals for stakeholder engagement, particularly when established in collaboration with stakeholders, improve clarity around decision-making expectations and opportunities for public participation.                                                                                                                                                                                         -   Involve stakeholders in identifying clear long- and short-term planning and agency management goals (measurable, achievable, and specific).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               -   Have clear goals for stakeholder engagement (e.g., goals based on this checklist).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               -   Employ metrics to determine the efficacy of stakeholder engagement and adapt strategies over time based on this evaluation (see introduction section outlining possible engagement metrics).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

  Build Relationships      Building key relationships between managers and fishery stakeholders can strengthen trust by putting a human face to management actions, connecting agency staff to communities through key communicators, and increasing empathy and understanding between managers and stakeholders.                                            Relationships and agency visibility contribute to public acceptance and allow managers to more quickly and nimbly respond to pressing stakeholder concerns—creating social resilience around management decision-making.                                                                                                                                                                          -   When appropriate, use personal names or identifying photos to communicate with stakeholders.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               -   Utilize communication platforms accessible by the affected stakeholder community.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               -   Disseminate materials in many different venues (e.g., physical, online, press).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               -   Respond to or contact stakeholders individually, and meet in-person when requested or appropriate.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               -   Acknowledge and affirm stakeholders for their efforts to engage.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               -   Interact with stakeholders informally in community settings.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

  Ensure Transparency      Transparency ensures the goals, motivations, and activities for management decision-making are communicated publicly and engagement processes are clearly documented. The public should be aware of how they can, and cannot, influence outcomes, and how their perspectives were ultimately considered within decision-making.   Transparency around how managers are approaching decision-making processes builds trust and interest in contributing. Transparency also helps establish stakeholder expectations and illuminate where interpretation or understanding may differ across stakeholders. Clarity in messaging is critical for reducing public misunderstanding, negative backlash to agency actions, and distrust.   -   Provide mechanisms for stakeholders to easily identify the status of the decision-making process and how they may engage proactively.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               -   Clearly and transparently communicate why and how the management decision is made (i.e., who will make the final decision, what is the role of stakeholders and fisheries users in the decision-making process, what information was used to influence the decision, how the decision will lead to outcomes optimizing, on balance, the public good, etc.).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               -   If information is withheld, communicate the reasons for doing so to stakeholders.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               -   Use clear, simple, and accessible language (e.g., language, structure, vocabulary); employ analogies and real-world examples in communications; and proofread outgoing materials.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               -   If a mistake is made, admit it and rectify it as soon as possible.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               -   Clearly define, in writing and verbally, the roles and influence of management, stakeholders, and the general public in the decision-making process.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               -   Provide clear rationale and need for stakeholder participation (e.g., stakeholders will be able to contribute to management goal-setting, invitations to engage clearly state how participation is in the stakeholders’ best interest).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

  Pursue Inclusivity       Ensuring an inclusive and public process is critical for safeguarding equitable decision-making and receiving a diversity of stakeholder voices.                                                                                                                                                                                  The marginalization of voices can lead to the delay or preclusion of management action, and the exclusion of voices can limit the information accrued to inform decision-making and stakeholder buy-in.                                                                                                                                                                                           -   Engage a representative cross section of stakeholder interests affected by the management decision and confirm this selection through transparent assessment of the affected communities.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               -   Disseminate information in the languages and formats that all potential stakeholders can understand.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

 California Requirements in Support of Stakeholder Engagement and Tribal Consultation
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Department of Fish & Wildlife and the Fish & Game Commission—the two
California agencies tasked with managing state fisheries—are subject to
a variety of requirements designed to inform and protect the public.
These requirements are the bare minimum for stakeholder engagement and
are primarily focused on notice of public hearings and public comment.
They also include consultation between government entities, including
tribes. The relevant requirements, in brief, are:

a.  *Marine Life Management Act (MLMA)*: Requires the use of a variety
    of stakeholder engagement methods throughout fisheries planning and
    research processes. e.g., Cal. Fish & Game Code §§ 7050(b)(7);
    7056(h),(e); 7059(a)(4); 7076(a); 7077. With regard to fishery
    management plans specifically, a minimum of two public hearings for
    each plan or plan amendment must be held before the Fish and Game
    Commission may reject or adopt the plan. Prior to scheduling a
    hearing, the Fish and Game Commission must consider where the
    majority of fishery participants are located, to increase the ease
    with which they may attend and their ability to
    participate effectively.

    Cal. Fish & Game Code § 7078(a),(c).

<!-- -->

a.  *California Administrative Procedures Act*: Requires all proposed
    agency regulations to be published in the California Regulatory
    Notice Register and remain open for public review and comment for a
    specified amount of time, but only requires public hearings
    on request. e.g., Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 11346.5(a)(17); § 11346.8(a).
    If an agency does hold a hearing, notice (including time, place,
    nature of proceedings, and authority) must be provided at least 45
    days before the hearing and the end of the public comment period via
    mail to all those who filed a notice request and through publication
    with the California Regulatory Notice Register. Cal. Gov’t Code
    § 11346.5. Written and oral statements must be allowed at the
    hearing; if a change to the regulation results, the agency must make
    the full text available at least fifteen days prior to the
    regulation’s adoption, repeal or amendment. Cal. Gov’t Code
    § 11346.8(c).

b.  *California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA)/National Environmental
    Policy Act (NEPA)*: Requires the production of environmental impact
    reports for projects that may have a significant impact on
    the environment. These reports must remain open for public review
    and comment for a specified amount of time. e.g., Cal. Pub. Res.
    Code §§ 21003(b); 21092(a),(b). Although both the CEQA and NEPA note
    specific requirements for how public comments generally must be
    addressed, the hearing must be designed such that all verbal
    comments can be recorded and provided in an official transcript to
    staff for response in writing. CEQA also maintains a series of
    public noticing requirements: generally, meetings must be properly
    noticed in local press at a minimum, and copies of the
    draft document(s) in question must be provided in hard copy upon
    request and at local community venues. Meeting notices must go out
    10 days in advance. Since most state-driven fisheries management
    processes will require CEQA or the MLMA equivalent only, it’s
    unlikely that federal environmental impact disclosure requirements
    will apply. However, in cases where NEPA is required, official
    public hearings generally must be noticed in the federal register a
    minimum of 10 days in advance.

c.  *Bagley-Keene Act*: Requires that state bodies allow public
    attendance at their meetings and that notice of the meetings be
    provided ahead of time along with an agenda specifying the main
    talking points. e.g., Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 11123(a) & 11125(a). The
    Act defines a meeting as “any congregation of a majority of the
    members of a state body at the same time and place to hear, discuss,
    or deliberate upon any item that is within the subject matter
    jurisdiction of the state body to which it pertains.” Cal. Gov’t
    Code § 11122.5(a). Under the Act, a state body includes both
    multi-member bodies created by law or statute to hold official
    meetings (Cal. Gov’t Code § 11121(a)) (e.g., the Fish and
    Game Commission) and advisory committees with three or more members
    created by formal action of another body. Cal. Gov’t Code
    § 11121(c). The provisions of the Bagley-Keene Act require notice
    (place, time, agenda, contact information) to be sent of meetings to
    those who request it, provided in writing and on the Internet at
    least 10 days prior to the meeting. Cal. Gov’t Code § 11125(a).

d.  *Tribal consultation*: Governor Jerry Brown’s 2011 Executive Order
    B-10-11 and the California Natural Resources Agency’s accompanying
    2012 Tribal Consultation Policy must be followed to “ensure
    effective government-to-government consultation” between the
    Department, the Commission, Indian tribes and tribal communities and
    to facilitate “meaningful input into the development of regulations,
    rules, policies, programs, projects, plans, property decisions and
    activities that may affect tribal communities.” Executive Order
    B-10-11, September 19, 2011, <http://gov.ca.gov/news.php?id=17223>;
    California Natural Resources Agency Tribal Consultation Policy,
    November 20,
    2012, http://resources.ca.gov/docs/tribal\_policy/Final\_Tribal\_Policy.pdf.

The MLMA is the principal law governing fishery management in California
and defines stakeholders as “individuals from the sport and commercial
fishing industries, aquaculture industries, coastal and ocean tourism
and recreation industries, marine conservation organizations, local
governments, marine scientists, and the public.” Cal. Fish & Game Code §
7050(b)(7). Generally, the MLMA requires that the fishery management
process remain open to the assistance and advice of stakeholders to
better incorporate local information and knowledge into the management
system. Cal. Fish & Game Code § 7056(h). For example, the fisheries
management system should allow stakeholders to “propose methods to
prevent or reduce excess effort in marine fisheries.” Cal. Fish & Game
Code § 7056(e). In addition, pursuant to the MLMA, the Department must
take steps to facilitate stakeholder involvement. For example, the
Department must hold discussions and meetings in locations accessible to
the highest concentration of stakeholders, where practical. Cal. Fish &
Game Code § 7059(a)(4).

The provisions above are designed to identify and explore stakeholder
concerns early in the decision-making process and increase the trust
between managers and relevant stakeholders. California resource laws
generally require that the fishery management process remain open to the
assistance and advice of stakeholders to better incorporate local
information and knowledge into the management system. How individual
laws may apply to each engagement strategy is explored further within
Section II below.

<span id="_Toc425172573" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc307053363" class="anchor"></span></span>Indicators for Evaluating Stakeholder Engagement 
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Managers should consistently evaluate stakeholder engagement to measure
whether and how strategies are achieving their target outcomes, and
adapt the strategies to better suit the changing needs and
characteristics of fisheries and stakeholders over time. Six different
types of indicators can help identify whether deployed strategies are
working effectively. While important, these evaluation techniques can be
challenging to implement and standardize, and remain limited in
assessing how meaningfully stakeholders have been *engaged* and heard
within the management process.

*For individual engagement strategies:*

-   **Communication materials** are enumerated to measure the amount of
    information managers disseminate to stakeholders (e.g., the number
    of newsletters sent or meeting announcements made).

-   **Web analytics** are used with social media platforms, webpages,
    and list serves to assess where stakeholders are directing their
    attention on an agency website, the demographics of social media
    followers, or which links stakeholders are pursuing within
    electronic newsletters (e.g., Google, Facebook, Tweetreach). The
    information can be used for adapting online strategies and
    understanding online audiences.

-   **Individual attendance and participation** in comment periods and
    in-person meetings can serve as a proxy for the number of people
    exposed to a management message or participating in
    feedback processes.

-   **Surveys** can evaluate the degree to which audiences use and
    understand agency messaging, to collect socio-economic data about
    fishery stakeholders, and to understand changing attitudes towards
    agencies over time. In the near term, they can also be used as an
    anonymous way for stakeholders to provide feedback on how the
    engagement is or is not meeting its stated goals.

*For agency outreach overall:*

-   **Reduced burden** on resource managers from decreased negative
    backlash can be a useful indicator of effective outreach, including
    fewer phone calls expressing negative opinions and less stakeholder
    litigation around management decision-making on account of
    insufficient engagement.

-   **Greater compliance** with management regulations indicates
    agencies are communicating rules effectively and securing
    sufficient buy-in. Identifying those who are chronically
    under-compliant can also help managers detect populations that may
    be underrepresented through current agency outreach strategies.

<span id="_Toc425172574" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc307053364" class="anchor"></span></span>*II. Description of Online Decision Support Tool *
================================================================================================================================================

The online decision support tool that accompanies this user manual helps
to inform the selection of appropriate stakeholder engagement strategies
to meet users’ stakeholder engagement needs. This decision support tool
applies to engagement before, during, and after a formal regulatory
process. The primary purpose of this decision support tool is to help
clearly articulate and substantiate the decision-making process by which
resource managers or other users determine their stakeholder engagement
strategies. In addition to a list of strategies based on the managers’
goals and the characteristics of their target stakeholder communities,
the tool also produces a short report that details why these strategies
received the ratings and prioritizations they did.

It is important to note that the information the user puts into the tool
(e.g., management goals, timing, stakeholder characteristics) may change
throughout the course of their engagement process. As such, the user
should take steps to periodically revisit the decision support tool to
ensure that the adopted approach continues to be appropriate for the
user’s needs.

The decision support tool (currently under development) follows a
three-step process to identify these strategies, as shown in Figure 1.
The research and information that underpins the tool is distilled from
over 55 interviews with resource managers and fishery stakeholders, the
direct input of managers who engage fishery stakeholders in states
outside of California, and the best available science on stakeholder
engagement.

Implicit here is a “step 0”, in which a decision is made to conduct
stakeholder engagement. This decision will be informed by an informal
assessment around the reasons for conducting stakeholder engagement and
whether it is timely in the process. This User Manual assumes that
nearly every management-focused decision making process will benefit
from at least some level of stakeholder engagement.

Figure 1: Engagement Strategy Selection Process

In the stakeholder engagement strategy selection process, Step 1 is
designed to identify appropriate strategies (and filter out others)
based on key criteria such as engagement goals and target audiences;
Step 2 weighs the outputs of Step 1 against existing opportunities and
constraints, and Step 3 selects the final strategy or strategies for
implementation. Each step is described in detail below.

**Step 1: Analyze Strategies to Meet Engagement Needs**

Step 1 involves analyzing the applicability of possible engagement
strategies against three factors critical to broader stakeholder
engagement needs:

-   Priority stakeholder engagement goals

-   Timing of the stakeholder engagement process

-   Characteristics of the target stakeholders

a.  *Prioritizing Engagement Goals*

Appropriate selection of any stakeholder engagement strategy depends,
most importantly, on the engagement goals the user is trying to achieve.
A list of common engagement goals is shown in the text box below and was
developed through assessments conducted by the Center for Ocean
Solutions and Kearns & West. Note that, in the text box below, the goals
under “support decision making” are rated the same as other goals, but
are broken out for greater clarity.

The user engages Step 1 of the decision support tool by rating the goals
below from most to least important (3 being most important and 1 being
least important to the process in question). The tool then weights the
strategies based on: (1) how the manager has prioritized the goals
(i.e., those with a “3” are rated highest) and (2) how stakeholder
engagement experts (including resource managers from other
jurisdictions) have rated the efficacy of each engagement strategy in
achieving the goals, based on their experience and best judgment (3
indicates the strategy is likely effective, 2 somewhat likely, 1 not
likely; see table of these ratings below). Table 2 below portrays how
each strategy has been rated based on how effectively it achieves a
given engagement goal by experts.

![](media/image1.png)

Table 2: Rating Engagement Strategies (in the rows above) against
Engagement Goals (in the columns)

These two ratings (user and expert) are then weighted according to Table
3 below, with the user’s prioritization determining a higher weighting
score. The decision support tool algorithm then organizes the strategies
based on this weighting scheme for further evaluation. Note that these
weightings may vary depending on the final algorithm. Here they are
meant to demonstrate how they will be *relatively* weighted based on how
managers and experts score the strategies.

  User Rating of Engagement Goal   Expert Rating: Efficacy of Strategy in Achieving Goal   Overall Weighting Score for Each Engagement Strategy
  -------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------
  3                                3                                                       6
  2                                3                                                       5
  3                                2                                                       4
  2                                2                                                       3
  1                                2                                                       2
  2                                1                                                       1

Table 3: Weighting of each strategy based on how users rate the
importance of each engagement goal and how experts rate how effective
each strategy is in achieving that goal.

a.  *Analyzing the Timing of the Engagement Process*

Selection of appropriate stakeholder engagement strategies also depends
on the timing of the anticipated engagement within the larger fisheries
management decision-making process. For example, a large-scale advisory
group with defined membership and a direct role in the decision-making
process may be appropriate in the “Early Planning” phase, but would be
less appropriate if a decision is already before the California Fish and
Game Commission for approval. Likewise, although informing stakeholders
using web updates and press releases is always useful, it may be the
primary engagement strategy to notify the public of regulatory decisions
under consideration by the Fish and Game Commission, or once a decision
is being implemented (such as limit changes or temporary fishing
closures due to algal blooms).

Users will identify the phase (early planning, late planning,
implementation, ongoing engagement needs) in which they will implement
an engagement strategy. The decision support tool will then select the
engagement strategies most applicable to the phase in question, based on
expert best judgment. A screenshot of the ratings of different
strategies relative to different phases is shown in Table 4; those
strategies listed as “yes” for the applicable phase move forward to
screening in Step 2.

![](media/image2.png)

Table 4: Timing

a.  *Analyzing Stakeholder Characteristics *

Importantly, selection of appropriate stakeholder engagement strategies
also depends on the characteristics of the fisheries stakeholders that
the user is striving to engage with, and these characteristics may vary
widely depending on the fishery in question. Selecting a stakeholder
strategy that works for the conditions in the commercial salmon fishery
may not work for spearfishers. In the decision support tool, users will
identify which of the following characteristics listed in Table 5 below
appropriately characterize their target fishery stakeholders.

  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Stakeholder Characteristic**                                                      **Description**
  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  1.  **Undefined Stakeholder Community**                                             Agency staff do not know the stakeholders within the geographic range of the fishery. Indicators of an undefined stakeholder community include staff not being able to identify individuals or institutions that have a stake in the management of the fishery.
                                                                                      
                                                                                      

  1.  **Linguistic Diversity**                                                        The stakeholder community comprises individuals who speak one or more non-English native languages.
                                                                                      
                                                                                      

  1.  **Organized Institutions Exist within the Fishery **                            The fishery has trusted and validated institutions (e.g., fishery associations, community groups, etc.) that are generally viewed by the members of that fishery to be active and effective as mechanisms for communicating with stakeholders. These institutions have the organizational capacity and resources to actively engage in the management process and communicate with their constituents in such a way that is more influential than an individual stakeholder’s efforts.
                                                                                      
                                                                                      

  1.  **High Capacity for Engagement**                                                Stakeholders have the time, money, and knowledge to travel to and participate in stakeholder engagement activities. Indicators of high capacity include meetings that are actively attended or management decisions that reflect a high level of rule compliance.
                                                                                      
                                                                                      

  1.  **Low Capacity for Engagement**                                                 Stakeholders do not have the time, money, and knowledge to travel to and participate in stakeholder engagement activities. Indicators of low capacity include stakeholders who are in low-income brackets and/or work and are therefore not available to meet during work day hours.
                                                                                      
                                                                                      

  1.  **High level of technological literacy**                                        Stakeholders have access to computers and internet connectivity (e.g., could participate in webinars), stakeholders use email and the internet weekly (e.g., blogs, on-line forums), and/or stakeholders use social media for communications and information exchange.
                                                                                      
                                                                                      

  1.  **Low level of technological literacy**                                         Stakeholders do not use computers or the internet to receive or exchange information, and are inconsistent in their use of email. They do not use social media or communicate in on-line forums.
                                                                                      
                                                                                      

  1.  **Large Geographic Size**                                                       The fishery and/or fishery stakeholders are dispersed throughout the state or exist in multiple regions in the state.
                                                                                      
                                                                                      

  1.  **Small Geographic Size **                                                      The fishery and/or fishery stakeholders are concentrated in 1-2 localized geographies where stakeholders can readily be identified.
                                                                                      
                                                                                      

  1.  **Existing leaders within the fishery**                                         There are key individuals who are viewed by others in the fishery as having participated in and/or legitimately represented the fishery in past stakeholder engagement efforts or professional associations.
                                                                                      
                                                                                      

  1.  **No existing leaders within the fishery**                                      There are no individuals who would be perceived by others within the fishery as having legitimately represented the fishery in past stakeholder engagement processes or professional associations.
                                                                                      
                                                                                      

  1.  **No recent engagement with resource managers on regulatory or other issues**   Stakeholders have NOT engaged with resource managers in planning, policy, or regulatory decision-making processes affecting their fishery within the past 5 years.
                                                                                      
                                                                                      
  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Table 5: Stakeholder Characteristics

Within the decision support tool, each of the engagement strategies has
been rated based on how appropriate or effective it is for reaching out
to stakeholders marked by those particular characteristics. These
ratings, as noted earlier, were completed by staff at Kearns & West and
the Center for Ocean Solutions based on their assessments and
corroborated with the ratings of stakeholder engagement experts in the
fisheries departments of state natural resource agencies both inside and
outside California. Strategies were rated a “3” if they were effective
in engaging the stakeholders with a given characteristic, a “2” if
somewhat effective, a “1” if not effective, and a “0” if not applicable
(e.g., many electronic methods can be applied agnostic to the geographic
scope of the fishery). See sample ratings in Table 6 below.

![](media/image3.png)

Table 6: Rating Stakeholder Engagement Strategies against Stakeholder
Characteristics

In the decision support tool, users identify whether their fishery
stakeholders ascribe to a given characteristic (“2”), the stakeholders
do not ascribe (“1”), or whether it is unknown or not applicable (“0”).
The strategies are then weighted based on how they are scored by (1) the
user and (2) expert ratings according to Table 7 below. Those strategies
that were rated as not effective for a characteristic that a user
ascribes to their stakeholders are not retained. Note that these
weightings may vary depending on the final algorithm. Here they are
meant to demonstrate how they will be *relatively* weighted based on how
managers and experts score the strategies.

  User Rating of Characteristic   Expert Rating: Efficacy of Strategy in Engaging a Fishery with the Characteristic   Overall Weighting Score for Each Engagement Strategy
  ------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------

  2   3   8
  --- --- ---
  2   2   7
  0   3   6
  0   2   5
  1   3   4
  1   2   3
  0   1   2
  1   1   1

Table 7: Weighting of each engagement strategy based on how users rate
the relevance of individual stakeholder characteristics and how experts
rate how effective each strategy is relative to that characteristic.

a.  *Initial Strategy Selection*

Those engagement strategies that receive the highest weighting scores
from the above calculations and do not receive a “1” rating in the
selected goals or stakeholder characteristics or a “no” for timeliness
will be prioritized by the decision support tool moving in Step 2, which
involves weighing the strategies that made the cut in Step 1 against
additional opportunities and constraints.

**Step 2: Opportunities and Constraints Analysis**

Step 2 involves several additional qualitative analyses intended to
further winnow and identify the most appropriate stakeholder engagement
strategies for any given situation. Section III of this User Manual
describes the individual engagement strategies, including purpose, keys
to success, timing, resource considerations, skills required, and other
potential constraints for each strategy. At this stage, users should use
their expert judgment to weigh all of the strategies that made the cut
in Step 1 against each other, using the information in Section I to
inform their analysis.

a.  *Engagement Principles and Keys to Success*

Some engagement strategies address the engagement principles described
above in Section I and (keys to success described in Section III) better
than others. Users should consider which of these engagement principles
and keys to success are most relevant to their processes.

a.  *Resource Considerations and Other Constraints*

Certain engagement strategies require more staff time and funding than
others. Users should carefully consider strategy selection in relation
to their overall engagement goals, taking into account their known
resources and capacity. Although some strategies may require a high
level of resources (i.e., staff time, skills, or funding), users may
select them if they will provide greater opportunities for engagement or
create buy-in around decision making. Indeed, sometimes selecting a more
resource intensive strategy early in the engagement process might save
time and resources later by building early trust with key groups, etc.

Likewise, the legal and regulatory landscape surrounding a decision may
place some constraints on which strategies are appropriate for a
particular decision or process. Some examples of laws with specific
requirements in relation to public outreach and stakeholder engagement
include the Federal Advisory Committees Act, California Administrative
Procedures Act, the Bagley-Keene Act and the National Environmental
Policy Act/California Environmental Quality Act.

Looking across the available strategies from Step 1, users should
consider whether there are resource constraints or legal considerations
that may remove some of the strategies from consideration.

a.  *Assess Recent Engagement Experiences*

Users should also consider the history of recent and past experiences
associated with the use of specific engagement strategies in certain
fisheries. Strategies that have been viewed as inappropriate or
ineffective and which would likely be resisted by stakeholders should be
avoided where possible. This is specific contextual nuance that only the
resource manager can bring to the engagement strategy selection process.

**Step 3: Select Final Strategy**

The user selects the individual strategy or suite of strategies based on
Steps 1 and 2 above and then inputs a written rationale for their
selection(s) into the decision support tool. This rationale, which will
be produced as a part of a short “report” form through the decision
support tool, can then be shared with the stakeholder communities
involved and used to help build buy-in in the engagement process moving
forward.

Again, the information the user puts into the tool (e.g., management
goals, timing, stakeholder characteristics) may change throughout the
course of their engagement process. As such, the user should take steps
to periodically revisit the decision support tool to ensure that the
adopted approach continues to be appropriate for the user’s needs.

*\
*

<span id="_Toc425172575" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc307053365" class="anchor"></span></span>*III. Stakeholder Engagement Strategies* 
=======================================================================================================================================

This section includes descriptions of 28 individual stakeholder
engagement strategies that are covered in this user manual and
incorporated into the decision support tool. Each description includes
information on the strategy’s purpose, timing, required resources,
required skills, keys to success, and evaluation approaches. Some
descriptions also include legal considerations.[^1]

1.  [Applications (phone) Error! Bookmark not defined.](#_Toc425172576)

2.  [Blogs 18](#_Toc425172577)

3.  [Collaborative Fisheries Research 18](#_Toc425172578)

4.  [Co-management Regimes 19](#_Toc425172579)

5.  [Conference Calls 20](#_Toc425172580)

6.  [Education Programs 20](#_Toc425172581)

7.  [Emails (individual or via listserv) 21](#_Toc425172582)

8.  [Fishery Associations Meetings 21](#_Toc425172583)

9.  [Informal Meet-and-greet Meetings 22](#_Toc425172584)

10. [Key Communicators 23](#_Toc425172585)

11. [Listening Sessions 23](#_Toc425172586)

12. [Newsletters (electronic) 24](#_Toc425172587)

13. [Online Fishing Forums 24](#_Toc425172588)

14. [Open House 25](#_Toc425172589)

15. [Phone Calls 26](#_Toc425172590)

16. [Polling 26](#_Toc425172591)

17. [Press Releases 27](#_Toc425172592)

18. [Public Hearings/Oral Testimony 27](#_Toc425172593)

19. [Social Media 28](#_Toc425172594)

20. [Stakeholder Advisory Groups (standing or ad hoc)
    > 29](#_Toc425172595)

21. [Surveys 30](#_Toc425172596)

22. [Tackle Shops 30](#_Toc425172597)

23. [Town Hall-Style Meetings 31](#_Toc425172598)

24. [Trade Shows 32](#_Toc425172599)

25. [Webinar Meetings 32](#_Toc425172600)

26. [Websites 33](#_Toc425172601)

27. [Workshops 33](#_Toc425172602)

28. [Written Public Comment 34](#_Toc425172603)

Detailed descriptions of each engagement strategy are in the sections
below.

![](media/image4.emf)

*Note: “Resource Needs” below will be listed as L/M/H (low/medium/high).
*

-   *For staffing, L=0-10% FTE. M=50% FTE. H=90-100% FTE (annually)*

-   *For budget, L=&lt;\$10k, M=\$10-50k, H=&gt;\$50k (per event or
    annually, as indicated)*

1.  **Applications (Phone Apps) **

<!-- -->

a.  *Description:* Phone applications provide cell phone users with a
    method to input information about fishing conditions and catch, or
    to quickly and efficiently receive information.

b.  *Purpose: *

    -   Phone apps provide a fast and easy method for managers to
        collect real-time data about fish catch, fishery conditions, and
        demographic information such as socio-economics.

    -   Managers can also use apps to disseminate timely information
        about updated fishery regulations, current rulemaking processes,
        and other relevant information. These near real-time updates may
        increase compliance with existing rules and regulations.

c.  *Timing*: Phone applications can be used to disseminate or solicit
    information at any point in the decision-making process, or on an ad
    hoc basis.

d.  *Required resources* *(annually)*:

-   Staffing: Low

    -   Minimal staff capacity (1-5% FTE) to draft relevant
        notifications and maintain app.

-   Budget: Medium

    -   \$5,000-25,000 upfront costs to create the app, possibly using
        other state management agency apps as a template.

    -   Likely will require use of external contractors.

a.  *Required skills*:

    -   Knowledge of the current rulemaking processes or relevant agency
        activities by participating staff and ability to tailor
        communications for the app interface.

    -   Clear and concise written messaging and timely
        communication skills.

    -   Significant computer programming skills to develop the app or
        adapt a template from other state resource agencies

b.  *Keys to success:*

    -   Agency staff tailor the app to fishery stakeholders through a
        high-quality user-centric design.

    -   Agency staff actively use the app to push out relevant
        information to users and gather information and data from
        fishery participants.

c.  *Evaluation: *

    -   Monitor the number of downloads.

    -   Monitor the frequency and consistency of usage.

    -   Monitor number of infractions before and after launching
        the app.

    -   Use surveys to evaluate how stakeholders use the app and how
        their perceptions of management may change as a result of
        app access.

<!-- -->

1.  <span id="_Toc425172577" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299115214"
    class="anchor"><span id="_Toc307053367"
    class="anchor"></span></span></span>**Blogs**

<!-- -->

a.  *Description*: Blogs are an internet-based method for writing
    informally about management status and processes. Managers use blogs
    to share information and ideas.

b.  *Purpose*:

    -   Managers can use this forum as an online Frequently Asked
        Questions message board, increase the visibility of management
        staff perspectives, and highlight current management interests
        and concerns.

    -   Stakeholders can use blogs to highlight their own perspectives,
        and share information, updates, and ideas about the fishery.

c.  *Timing*:

    -   Blogs can be used to circulate relevant or timely information to
        online readers at any point in the decision-making process, or
        on an ad hoc basis.

d.  *Required resources:*

    -   Staffing: Low

        -   5% staff FTE to write blog posts and respond to comments on
            a monthly basis.

    -   Budget: Low

e.  *Required skills*:

    -   Clear and concise written communication skills.

    -   Basic internet skills.

f.  *Keys to success*:

    -   Agency staff link other online resources (website, social
        media, etc.) to blog posts to increase visibility.

    -   Agency staff use an informal, clear voice and employ stories to
        connect with readers.

    -   Agency staff can repeatedly refer stakeholders to relevant and
        popular information on past blog posts, replacing the need for
        individual emails.

    -   Agency staff establish a clear and timely vetting process to
        review and edit the newsletter in advance of sending.

g.  *Evaluation*:

    -   Use Google Analytics to monitor traffic to the blog over time,
        identify the issues or questions most relevant to readers, and
        pinpoint which resources readers most often link to (e.g.,
        identify the additional information readers seek while reading
        the blog post, to help predict and tailor information for
        future posts).

<!-- -->

1.  <span id="_Toc425172578" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299115215"
    class="anchor"><span id="_Toc307053368"
    class="anchor"></span></span></span>**Collaborative Fisheries
    Research**

<!-- -->

a.  *Description*: Managers, researchers, and fishermen co-design and
    co-conduct research to assess fishery status or test a
    management option. Note that the engagement component of
    collaborative fisheries research is secondary to the primary purpose
    of conducting research.

b.  *Purpose*:

-   Collaborative fisheries research evaluates hypotheses around the
    efficacy of various management alternatives or tests specific
    management-relevant technology.

-   Collaborative research serves to engage fishery stakeholders with
    relevant context or expertise in a rigorous and intensive process of
    formulating research questions and executing research design, thus
    fostering and building relationships and trust in the process.

-   Collaborative research increases buy-in and ownership of the
    decision-making process, increases transparency around the use of
    data in decision-making, improves the valuation of scientific
    information in decision-making, and motivates co-development of
    management goals.

a.  *Timing*:

-   Collaborative research is most appropriate in the early stages of
    planning or decision-making, as it explicitly seeks to generate
    knowledge and information relevant to the creation of management
    options and the weighing of management alternatives.

-   Collaborative research can also be used to inform ongoing
    management needs.

a.  *Required resources:*

-   Staffing: High

    -   &gt;1 full-time staff member to help design and manage the
        research collaboration. 30% staff FTE to analyze, translate, and
        communicate the research results.

-   Budget: High

    -   Likely will require use of external contractors.

    -   &gt;\$500 for research supplies, depending on the research
        question and design.

a.  *Required skills*:

-   Research design and implementation skills.

-   Project and team management skills.

-   Research-appropriate analysis and communication skills.

a.  *Keys to success*:

-   Allow sufficient time and resources to collaboratively design and
    implement research, including training stakeholders without previous
    experience with target methodologies.

-   Create a culture of open communication and transparency,
    particularly around research assumptions and concerns, but also
    around results and findings.

-   Craft feasible and outcome-oriented goals for the research.

-   Ensure that there is money and time to translate and communicate the
    results to all collaborators and their respective communities in
    appropriate formats.

a.  *Evaluation*:

-   Monitor whether participants ask for or disseminate the research
    findings, indicating their valuation of the data.

-   Track how participants follow-up (e.g., email, phone) to make
    observations or continue discussion about the research.

-   Use surveys to evaluate changes in how participants perceive
    management processes, consider scientific information, or trust
    in managers.

1.  <span id="_Toc425172579" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299115216"
    class="anchor"><span id="_Toc307053369"
    class="anchor"></span></span></span>**Co-management Regimes**

<!-- -->

A.  *Description*: Co-management is when fisheries management agencies
    share joint institutional responsibility and authority for managing
    a fishery with other governmental entities (e.g., tribes)
    or stakeholders.

B.  *Purpose*:

-   Co-management guarantees fishery users a direct role in the
    decision-making process around regulations affecting the fishery.

-   Co-management helps build trust and relationships between fisheries
    management agencies and other governmental entities or stakeholders.

A.  *Timing*:

-   Early or late planning

A.  *Required resources*:

-   Staffing: High

    -   Co-management can be labor intensive for staff, although this
        needs to be weighed against the opportunity cost of managing the
        fishery in an alternative format.

-   Budget: High

    -   Likely will require use of external contractors.

A.  *Required skills*:

-   In-depth knowledge of fisheries management and science for the
    particular fishery is important, as well as a significant
    understanding of MLMA and other fisheries regulations
    more generally.

-   Significant large and small group facilitation skills
    are preferable.

-   Logistics and event planning expertise is beneficial.

-   Collaborative and joint problem-solving skills.

A.  *Keys to success*:

-   Clear and legally defensible roles and responsibilities for all
    parties involved in the co-management regime need to be defined.

-   All members of the management team should share the same level of
    knowledge to make informed decisions

A.  *Legal considerations*:

-   Discuss with DFW/FGC

A.  *Evaluation*:

-   Discuss with DFW/FGC

1.  <span id="_Toc425172580" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299115217"
    class="anchor"><span id="_Toc307053370"
    class="anchor"></span></span></span>**Conference Calls**

-   *Description*: Managers engage a group of stakeholders remotely
    via telephone.

-   *Purpose*:

<!-- -->

-   Conference calls facilitate two-way dialogue between fisheries
    managers and stakeholders.

-   They provide an efficient and accessible method of engagement by
    reducing the cost and travel time for participants.

<!-- -->

-   *Timing*:

<!-- -->

-   Early or late planning

-   Throughout project implementation

-   As part of ongoing engagement throughout the life of a project or
    regulation

<!-- -->

-   *Required resources*:

<!-- -->

-   Staffing: Low

    -   Less than 1% FTE.

    -   At a minimum, one staff person required to convene and lead the
        calls, with additional staff support as needed.

-   Budget: Low

<!-- -->

-   *Required skills*:

<!-- -->

-   Large group facilitation skills are desired, but not required

<!-- -->

-   *Keys to success*:

<!-- -->

-   Clear understanding of teleconference “ground rules” (i.e., avoid
    putting people on “hold,” speak clearly and concisely, mute when not
    speaking, etc.) is essential for a successful teleconference.

-   Teleconferences are generally most suitable for groups of 10 or
    less, but can be adapted to reach dozens or hundreds of
    people simultaneously.

-   Teleconferences suffer from a lack of “visual cues.” As such, they
    are better suited for sharing information rather than negotiation or
    conflict resolution.

<!-- -->

-   *Evaluation*:

<!-- -->

-   Use surveys to evaluate how stakeholders perceived the utility of
    the call to become informed about a fishery issue.

1.  <span id="_Toc425172581" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299115218"
    class="anchor"><span id="_Toc307053371"
    class="anchor"></span></span></span>**Education Programs**

<!-- -->

a.  *Description*: Education programs train stakeholders to build their
    understanding of the management process and capacity to engage in
    scoping or revising management rules. Education programs are often
    multiple day intensives where key leaders, youth, or particularly
    active stakeholders are trained in how to engage effectively and in
    management processes more generally (e.g., rulemaking 101), and
    given the opportunity to socialize with other stakeholders and
    agency staff.

b.  *Purpose*:

-   Education programs aim to increase long-term engagement of key
    fishery stakeholders, foster leadership among fishery stakeholders,
    and build relationships between stakeholders and managers.

a.  *Timing*:

-   Education programs are most appropriate in the early stages of
    planning or decision-making, as they seek to proactively train
    stakeholders to engage later in the process.

-   Education programs can also be helpful for motivating engagement on
    an ongoing basis.

a.  *Required resources:*

-   Staffing: Low

    -   At least 1 full-time staff member to develop, implement and
        manage the educational aspects of agency
        decision-making processes.

    -   &gt;30% staff FTE to support and co-facilitate the full-time
        lead staff member.

-   Budget: Low

    -   \$5,000-100,000 depending on facility needs, curriculum
        development, and scholarship opportunities offered
        to participants.

a.  *Required skills*:

-   Process design and facilitation skills.

-   Curriculum development, training, and project management skills.

-   Clear and concise written and oral communication skills.

a.  *Keys to success*:

-   Invite and incorporate trusted speakers from across stakeholder
    groups and agency leadership; invite a member of the stakeholder
    community as the keynote speaker.

-   If the goal is to build trust and relationships, the program is best
    implemented over 2-4 days to ensure adequate time for socializing
    and group cohesion.

-   Provide scholarships to emerging leaders or key communicators within
    target fisheries to motivate or facilitate participation.

-   Ensure adequate representation across stakeholder or fisher groups
    to help build bridges across different perspectives and backgrounds.

a.  *Evaluation*:

-   Use surveys to evaluate changes in how stakeholders engage before
    and after the education program.

-   Monitor the engagement of stakeholders who have participated in
    programs compared with those who have not.

1.  <span id="_Toc425172582" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299115219"
    class="anchor"><span id="_Toc307053372"
    class="anchor"></span></span></span>**Emails (individual or
    via listserv)**

<!-- -->

a.  *Description*: Emails typically include relatively brief messages
    used to inform or share information with intended recipients. Emails
    may also contain attached documents. Recipients may range from
    individuals to large groups of stakeholders accessed via a listserv.

b.  *Purpose*:

-   Personal emails to key individuals can help build relationships and
    create two-way dialogue between active fishery participants
    and managers.

-   Mass emails to stakeholders can also serve to efficiently
    disseminate timely information to a targeted audience.

a.  *Timing*:

-   Emails can be used to circulate relevant or timely information to
    individual stakeholders at any point in the decision-making process,
    or on an ad hoc basis.

a.  *Required resources:*

-   Staffing: Low

    -   Less than 1% FTE.

    -   At a minimum, one staff person required to convene and lead the
        calls, with additional staff support as needed.

-   Budget: Low

    -   Varies depending on the content of the email and the incoming
        stakeholder requests.

a.  *Required skills*:

-   Personable, written communication skills and the ability to answer
    questions or concerns clearly and concisely.

a.  *Keys to success*:

-   Agency staff send timely and considerate responses to
    individual emails.

<!-- -->

-   For emails sent to multiple stakeholders, agency staff establish a
    clear and timely vetting process to review and edit the messages in
    advance of sending.

a.  *Evaluation*:

-   Fewer emails expressing strongly negative views of agency staff or
    activities over time.

1.  <span id="_Toc425172583" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299115220"
    class="anchor"><span id="_Toc307053373"
    class="anchor"></span></span></span>**Fishery Associations
    Meetings**

<!-- -->

a.  *Description*: Managers attend fishery association meetings convened
    by industry associations or recreational fishers to make
    announcements and meet stakeholders. Association meetings usually
    involve their membership, but may also include the broader
    fishing community.

b.  *Purpose*:

-   Attending association meetings provides fisheries managers with the
    opportunity to present and share information directly to
    fishery users.

-   Managers can receive input from fishery users in an environment
    where they are likely to share information more freely than in a
    venue with more conflicting interests present (e.g., an
    advisory group).

-   Attending association meetings is an efficient method for meeting
    fishermen face-to-face and building relationships.

a.  *Timing*:

-   Early or late planning

-   During program implementation

-   During ongoing program activities in anticipation of future policy
    or regulatory changes

a.  *Required resources*:

-   Staffing: Low

    -   2-3% FTE depending on the number of meetings, including
        presentation development and attendance.

    -   Fishery association meetings are often 1-3 hours and take place
        close to the docks.

-   Budget: Low

a.  *Required skills*:

-   In-depth understanding of the scientific, regulatory, management,
    and economic background of the process question.

-   Ability to reach out to and interact with groups whose interests may
    not align with the agency.

a.  *Keys to success*:

-   Developing relationships with key communicators and fishery leaders
    within a particular fishing sector can be critical for ensuring
    agency staff are well-received during association meetings. These
    relationships can also be nurtured at association meetings.

-   Entering into an environment where many stakeholders may not be
    supportive of fisheries management regulation can be challenging for
    agency staff unaccustomed to managing difficult relationships.
    Managers utilizing this engagement method should be comfortable
    interacting in these types of environments.

a.  *Evaluation*:

-   Track relationships built through participation in fishery
    association meetings (e.g., development of new key communicators).

-   Use surveys to evaluate whether agency staff participation in a
    meeting was appreciated and viewed as time well spent by
    their membership.

1.  <span id="_Toc425172584" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299115221"
    class="anchor"><span id="_Toc307053374"
    class="anchor"></span></span></span>**Informal Meet-and-greet
    Meetings **

<!-- -->

a.  *Description: Small group or one-on-one discussions between
    fisheries managers and stakeholders,* often located in public
    establishments close to the docks.

b.  *Purpose*:

-   Meet-and-greets provide fisheries managers with the opportunity to
    build personal relationships with individual fisheries users in an
    informal environment.

-   They allow fisheries stakeholders to share concerns and input with
    fisheries managers in an informal environment.

a.  *Timing*:

-   Early or late planning

-   Throughout project implementation

-   As part of ongoing engagement throughout the life of a project or
    regulation

a.  *Required resources*:

-   Staffing: Low (although depends on how many meeting are conducted)

    -   One staffer per meeting, with additional staff support as needed

-   Budget: Low

a.  *Required skills*:

-   Comfort engaging with individuals who may not agree with or be
    outwardly hostile towards a particular management or
    regulatory decision.

a.  *Keys to success*:

-   Providing food and drink at these meetings is always helpful and
    will motivate participation.

-   Agency staff build on existing relationships and key communicators
    to bring in new participants.

-   Agency staff meet-and-greet events are not efficient ways to reach
    out to many fishermen all at once.

a.  *Evaluation*:

-   Use surveys to evaluate how stakeholders perceived the value of the
    meetings to become informed about a fishery issue or form
    relationships with managers.

1.  <span id="_Toc425172585" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299115222"
    class="anchor"><span id="_Toc307053375"
    class="anchor"></span></span></span>**Key Communicators**

<!-- -->

a.  *Description*: Managers work with key members (usually leaders) of a
    fishing community and other stakeholder groups as nodes for building
    trust, communicating with other participants within their fisheries
    about management processes, and providing critical feedback on
    management options.

b.  *Purpose*:

-   Leveraging key communicators provides fisheries managers or agency
    staff with the opportunity to build close relationships with leaders
    in a particular fishery.

-   Key communicators provide a means of engaging hard-to-reach fishery
    groups: they speak the same language as users; have established,
    positive relationships within the particular fishing community; and
    are sometimes seen as being able to speak for the fishery
    in question.

a.  *Timing*:

-   Early or late planning

-   During program implementation

-   During ongoing program activities

a.  *Required resources*:

-   Staffing: Low (variable effort: depends on the project and how often
    communication is needed)

    -   One staffer on point

-   Budget: Low

a.  *Required skills*:

-   Direct management and implementation knowledge of the fishery
    management issue.

-   In depth understanding of the scientific, regulatory, management,
    and economic background of the process question.

-   Ability to reach out to and interact with groups whose interests may
    not align with the agency.

-   Ability to foster and maintain informal and formal relationships
    with diverse people.

-   Management-level responsibilities are beneficial, as communicators
    will likely want to know if the staff they speak to can make
    decisions based on the feedback they receive.

a.  *Keys to success*:

-   Agency staff that establish relationships with key communicators
    remain the point of contact for that person over time to
    sustain trust.

-   To identify key communicators, start by asking members of the
    fishing community who they go to for information about the fishery.

-   Do not assume that by engaging key communicators, the entire fishing
    community is heard or represented. Key communicators may still
    represent the majority and minority voices must be
    engaged individually.

a.  *Evaluation*:

-   Use surveys of key communicators to evaluate their perceptions of
    the agency over time.

1.  <span id="_Toc425172586" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299115223"
    class="anchor"><span id="_Toc307053376"
    class="anchor"></span></span></span>**Listening Sessions**

<!-- -->

a.  *Description*: Listening sessions are in-person meetings between
    managers and stakeholders focused on providing a venue for
    stakeholders to voice their interests and concerns. Managers are
    present primarily in a listening (rather than
    information presentation) capacity.

b.  *Purpose*:

-   Listening sessions help managers get a pulse on the range of options
    for crafting management alternatives, potentially identify creative
    management opportunities by introducing new perspectives, and
    elevate the voices of underrepresented stakeholder groups.

a.  *Timing*:

-   Listening sessions are most appropriate in the early stages of
    planning or decision-making because they help identify priority
    interests and concerns that can guide the formation of
    management alternatives. However, listening sessions can be used
    throughout management processes to ascertain key stakeholder
    interests and provide a space for stakeholders to voice concerns.

a.  *Required resources:*

-   Staffing: Low

    -   5% staff FTE to design and implement.

    -   1-3 additional staff to participate in the event itself (1-2
        hours per session).

-   Budget: Low

    -   \$2,000 for facilitation materials and travel costs for staff.

a.  *Required skills*:

-   Process design and facilitation skills.

-   Oral communication and interpersonal skills.

a.  *Keys to success*:

-   Agency staff craft these meetings to be deliberative
    and transparent.

-   Agency staff target communities that are not reached during public
    hearings and which have a range of active stakeholder groups.

-   Ensure information presented to stakeholders during the session is
    designed to solicit input on desired issues/questions instead of
    fisheries’ management generally.

-   Agency staff distribute flyers and emails marketing the open
    house widely. Staff ensure that the open house receives publicity
    from sources stakeholders’ trust.

-   Agency staff hold listening sessions throughout the entire affected
    geographic area to ensure that stakeholder participation is not
    limited by travel costs.

a.  *Evaluation*:

-   Monitor the number of individuals who attend.

-   Monitor the number of written comments or feedback received.

-   Consider asking participants to complete a short survey before
    leaving to collect feedback on the format and efficacy of the
    listening session.

1.  <span id="_Toc425172587" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299115224"
    class="anchor"><span id="_Toc307053377"
    class="anchor"></span></span></span>**Newsletters (electronic)**

<!-- -->

a.  *Description*: Electronic newsletters can be used to disseminate
    information to a large number of stakeholders in a formal and
    consistent manner.

b.  *Purpose*:

    -   Newsletters communicate a message to a large number of
        stakeholders (e.g., upcoming management changes or
        rulemaking processes).

c.  *Timing*:

    -   Newsletters can be appropriate at any point in the
        management process.

d.  *Required resources:*

-   Staffing: Low

    -   5-10% staff FTE to draft, vet, and send newsletters on a
        consistent, as-needed basis, and to maintain and update the
        newsletter list serve contacts.

-   Budget: Low

a.  *Required skills*:

    -   The ability to design and post timely messages that reflect
        agency perspectives and values.

    -   Clear and concise written communication skills.

    -   Thorough understanding of agency formatting and review protocols

b.  *Keys to success*:

    -   Agency staff use engaging visuals and stories to communicate
        their messages.

    -   A clear and timely vetting process is established within the
        agency to review and edit the newsletter in advance of sending.

    -   Agency staff, when appropriate, pair the newsletter release with
        messaging about ‘untraditional’ engagement processes (e.g.,
        visioning meetings) that will draw attention and readership.

c.  *Evaluation*:

    -   Use software (e.g., Gov Delivery) to monitor newsletter use
        (e.g., whether or not stakeholders open the newsletter and which
        links they click for follow-up information).

<!-- -->

1.  <span id="_Toc425172588" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299115225"
    class="anchor"><span id="_Toc307053378"
    class="anchor"></span></span></span>**Online Fishing Forums **

<!-- -->

a.  *Description*: Proactive participation on informal message boards
    and forums allows staff to virtually meet stakeholders on frequently
    visited websites to exchange ideas and information.

b.  *Purpose*:

    -   Online fishing forums provide a venue to increase the visibility
        of management staff, promote agency messaging within trusted
        channels, and limit the proliferation of unclear or
        inaccurate information.

c.  *Timing*:

    -   Agency staff can participate in online forums to informally
        build trust or visibility for agency processes, or circulate
        relevant or timely information to individual stakeholders at any
        point in the decision-making process, or on an ad hoc basis.

d.  *Required resources:*

-   Staffing: Low

    -   1-10% staff FTE depending on forum activity.

-   Budget: Low

a.  *Required skills*:

    -   The ability to design and post timely messages that reflect
        agency perspectives and values.

    -   Reading and effectively responding to the ongoing dialogue
        online, which involves making stakeholders feel heard, managing
        their expectations, and being transparent.

b.  *Keys to success*:

    -   Agency staff humanize themselves by using their own names and
        profile photos when able.

    -   Agency staff strive to limit inaccurate information by
        responding with clear information.

    -   Agency staff are trained in social media best practices and feel
        confident in crafting and tailoring short messages.

c.  *Evaluation*:

    -   Monitor Google Analytics to evaluate whether stakeholders are
        clicking on relevant links posted on forums to learn more about
        agency activities.

    -   Capture how often individual connections are fostered between
        stakeholders and agency staff through forum participation when
        stakeholders explicitly note this verbally or in written form.

<!-- -->

1.  <span id="_Toc425172589" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299115226"
    class="anchor"><span id="_Toc307053379"
    class="anchor"></span></span></span>**Open House **

<!-- -->

a.  *Description*: Open houses are often structured in an open-floor
    format with different ‘stations’ placed around a large room.
    Stakeholders may engage in dialogue with content experts and provide
    comment as desired.

b.  *Purpose*:

    -   Individual stakeholders interact directly with agency staff and
        build relationships with decisionmakers.

    -   Agency staff have the opportunity to learn stakeholder issues
        and key concerns.

    -   Interested fishery stakeholders become more knowledgeable about
        a specific rulemaking process.

c.  *Timing*:

    -   Open houses can be used during the decision-making process to
        solicit specific input on a draft rulemaking or on an ongoing
        basis to solicit input on a series of rulemakings or to build
        trust among stakeholders.

d.  *Required resources:*

-   Staffing: Low

    -   5% staff FTE.

    -   3-15 staff to participate in the event itself, including their
        travel costs.

-   Budget: Low

    -   \$1,000 for materials.

a.  *Required skills*:

    -   Knowledge of the current rulemaking processes by
        participating staff.

    -   Facilitation and process design skills for setting up and
        managing the open house room format.

    -   Oral communication and interpersonal skills.

b.  *Keys to success*:

    -   Open houses are hosted over several hours to enable stakeholders
        with varying schedules to participate.

    -   Agency staff distribute flyers and emails marketing the open
        house widely. Staff ensure that the open house receives
        publicity from sources stakeholders’ trust.

    -   Open houses can be used early on in a controversial decision
        process to build trust and answer specific questions.

c.  *Evaluation: *

    -   Monitor the number of individuals who attend.

    -   Monitor the number of written comments or feedback received.

    -   Consider asking participants to complete a short survey before
        leaving to collect feedback on the format and efficacy of the
        open house.

<!-- -->

1.  <span id="_Toc425172590" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299115227"
    class="anchor"><span id="_Toc307053380"
    class="anchor"></span></span></span>**Phone Calls**

<!-- -->

a.  *Description*: Phone calls are an opportunity for fisheries managers
    to communicate orally with individual stakeholders via telephone.
    These may be initiated by the fisheries manager or the stakeholder.

b.  *Purpose*:

    -   Phone calls provide fisheries managers or agency staff with an
        informal opportunity to reach out directly to individual
        stakeholders to ask questions, receive input, and
        build relationships.

    -   Phone calls initiate two-way communication to test ideas on
        sensitive subjects: this may be useful in cases where
        stakeholders or fisheries managers don’t feel comfortable
        creating a written record.

c.  *Timing*:

    -   Early or late planning

    -   During program implementation

    -   During ongoing program activities

d.  *Required resources*:

    -   Staffing: Low (requirements are variable depending on
        communication needs)

    -   Budget: Low

e.  *Required skills*:

    -   Clear and articulate verbal communication skills.

f.  *Keys to success*:

    -   Phone calls should be used strategically because they do not
        engage many fishermen at once, thus are inefficient.

g.  *Evaluation*:

    -   N/A

<!-- -->

1.  <span id="_Toc425172591" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299115228"
    class="anchor"><span id="_Toc307053381"
    class="anchor"></span></span></span>**Polling**

<!-- -->

a.  *Description*: Polling samples or collects opinions on a subject,
    > taken from either a selected or a random group of stakeholders.
    > Polling can be done through a survey or real time using mobile
    > phone devices (mobile polling).

b.  *Purpose*:

    -   Polling is similar to surveys (see below) but with a greater
        level of specificity (usually a single question). The purpose of
        a poll is to solicit input on a specific issue quickly.

c.  *Timing*:

-   Early or late planning

-   During implementation

-   Provided on an ongoing basis to solicit input on a specific aspect
    of fisheries management

a.  *Required resources*:

-   Staffing: Low

    -   2-4 hours to design, implement, and compile results of a poll.

    -   1 staffer to design and implement the poll (for
        electronic/web-based polls). Multiple staffers may be needed if
        polls are carried out in the field.

-   Budget: Low

a.  *Required skills*:

-   Knowledge of the process in question by participating staff.

-   Familiarity with survey design tools like SurveyMonkey (online) or
    mobile polling applications.

a.  *Keys to success*:

-   The poll should be designed around a single yes/no (or other
    binary choice) question.

a.  *Evaluation*:

-   Monitor the polling response rate.

1.  <span id="_Toc425172592" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299115229"
    class="anchor"><span id="_Toc307053382"
    class="anchor"></span></span></span>**Press Releases **

    a.  *Description*: Written or recorded communication directed at
        members of the news media to announce something newsworthy
        (often a major project milestone or regulatory decision).

    b.  *Purpose*:

    -   Press releases reach a broad audience quickly, inform members of
        the public about a major decision or milestone, and target
        individuals who may not otherwise be aware of fisheries issues,
        as publications carrying releases have a broader customer base
        than agency list serves.

    a.  *Timing*:

    -   Early or late planning

    -   During implementation

    -   Provided on an ongoing basis to solicit input on a series of
        rulemakings or to build trust among stakeholders

    a.  *Required resources*:

    -   Staffing: Low

    <!-- -->

    -   0.5-1 hour of staff time to help draft and review the
        press release.

    -   5 hours of staff time to have the release reviewed internally
        and distributed.

    -   One public information officer to draft and finalize the press
        release (usually already part of their job responsibilities)

    <!-- -->

    -   Budget: Low

    <!-- -->

    -   Depending on the media outlet used, there may be a cost
        associated with the release being posted. Distribution services
        such as PR Newswire charge a fee; contacting individual outlets
        directly generally do not.

    a.  *Required skills*:

    -   Knowledge of the fishery management issue by
        participating staff.

    -   Familiarity with release distribution services like PR Newswire
        and Business Wire.

    a.  *Keys to success*:

    -   Press releases should be distributed between 1 week and 3 days
        in advance of any event or major decision announcement.

    -   Press releases must be posted to news distribution services or
        media outlets before press deadlines at least the day before the
        desired release date, but not more than 2 days before.

    -   Press releases should include the purpose of the release in the
        headline with basic information (who, what, where, when,
        and why) in the body of the text. Links can be provided to more
        detailed information as needed.

    -   If the target outlet is a specific local publication, agency
        staff must contact the writer covering the area of interest
        (i.e., natural resources, politics, local news, etc.) directly
        to pitch the story.

    -   Press releases reach only those that consistently read target
        news outlets and only communicate a specific message. As such,
        they need to be supplemented by other engagement strategies that
        provide opportunities for more engaging or
        story-based messaging.

    a.  *Evaluation*:

    -   Monitor the number of publications that run the story.

    -   Review publications to see where the release appears in the
        printed version. Particularly for newspapers, the release’s
        physical location in the publication (e.g., “above the fold”) is
        almost as important as whether or not it appears at all.

2.  <span id="_Toc425172593" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299115230"
    class="anchor"><span id="_Toc307053383"
    class="anchor"></span></span></span>**Public Hearings/Oral
    Testimony**

<!-- -->

a.  *Description*: Public hearings are opportunities for members of the
    > public to provide oral testimony at formal public meetings or as
    > part of a regulatory process.

b.  *Purpose*:

    -   Public hearings provide fisheries managers or agency staff with
        a formal spoken record on a regulatory process.

    -   They provide stakeholders with a formal opportunity to provide
        input to inform management decisions.

c.  *Timing: *

    -   Early or late planning

d.  *Required resources*:

    -   Staffing: Medium

    <!-- -->

    -   Public hearings require a minimum of one lead staffer or
        project/regulatory lead, one support staff member, one certified
        court reporter, and one facilitator to implement the meeting.

    -   Fish & Game Commission meetings need one additional fisheries
        manager to make presentations or answer questions.

    <!-- -->

    -   Budget: Depends on whether external facilitation is needed.

        i.  Low (if convened and facilitated by an existing Board
            or Commission)

        ii. Medium (if external facilitation is required)

e.  *Required skills*:

    -   Large group facilitation

    -   Stenography

    -   Event planning and logistics support

f.  *Keys to success*:

    -   Developing a clear facilitation plan document is critical for
        the success of public hearings and public testimony. At a
        minimum, these documents should outline:

        i.  Staff roles and responsibilities

        ii. Tightly managed timeframes for each agenda item

        iii. Clearly defined time limits for each public commenter

        iv. Step-by-step instructions for the public comment portion of
            the meeting, including (but not limited to) who will handle
            microphones, how the facilitator will keep time, and how or
            whether staff will provide responses to comments during the
            meeting

g.  *Legal Considerations:*

    -   Public Hearings and official testimony is generally subject to
        open meeting laws and other administrative procedures/regulatory
        requirements as described in Figure 4.

h.  *Evaluation*:

    -   Count the number of oral comments received at a meeting.

<!-- -->

1.  <span id="_Toc425172594" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299115231"
    class="anchor"><span id="_Toc307053384"
    class="anchor"></span></span></span>**Social Media **

<!-- -->

a.  *Description*: Facebook, Twitter, Instagram, Flickr, and YouTube are
    > online social media tools to inform a large number of people
    > (beyond those on existing list serves) of key messages and
    > increase the visibility of managers among specific
    > stakeholder groups.

b.  *Purpose*:

    -   Social media is a low-cost and efficient method for reaching a
        large number of people, including fishery stakeholders who may
        be underrepresented in other engagement processes or the
        general public.

c.  *Timing*:

-   Social media can be appropriate at any point in the
    management process.

a.  *Required resources:*

-   Staffing: Low

    -   1-5% staff FTE to maintain social media accounts, respond to
        comments, and manage dialogue.

-   Budget: Low

a.  *Required skills*:

-   Ability to design and post timely messages that reflect agency
    perspectives and values.

-   Clear and concise written communication skills.

a.  *Keys to success*:

-   Agency staff that use their own names and identifying
    characteristics help humanize agency activities and create champions
    within the stakeholder community that will voluntarily moderate
    online discussions among users with different perspectives.

-   Agency staff streamline messaging across departments, including the
    connectivity between division or region-specific pages.

-   Agency staff use engaging visuals and stories to communicate.

<!-- -->

-   Agency staff deploy social media tools to allow disparate
    perspectives to emerge on various social media threads. This allows
    stakeholders to see the diversity of opinions managers need to
    consider publicly and can help manage expectations around
    management outcomes.

-   Agency staff refer to existing state and federal guidelines for
    building and maintaining government social media presence.

-   Agency leaders invite social media representatives to train staff in
    using social media (e.g., Facebook’s Start to Success Program).

a.  *Evaluation*:

-   Monitor social media using the online tools designed to do so
    (e.g., Tweetreach).

-   Use surveys to evaluate changes in attitudes towards the agency or
    use of agency social media.

1.  <span id="_Toc425172595" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299115232"
    class="anchor"><span id="_Toc307053385"
    class="anchor"></span></span></span>**Stakeholder Advisory Groups
    (standing or ad hoc)**

<!-- -->

a.  *Description*: Stakeholder advisory groups are multi-interest bodies
    > of appointed stakeholders convened for a pre-determined period of
    > time to provide advice to a decision-making body. Stakeholder
    > advisory groups can serve to identify key issues, generate
    > management alternatives, or liaise between managers and advisory
    > group constituencies. They typically have charters describing
    > their core charge and participants, and they can meet once or
    > multiple times. There are two kinds of stakeholder advisory group:

    -   Standing stakeholder advisory groups:

        i.  Typically focused on a particular fishery.

        ii. Typically meet at set intervals throughout a year.

        iii. Formalized, rotating membership.

    -   Ad hoc stakeholder advisory groups:

        i.  Typically focused on a particular policy, planning, or
            regulatory issue.

        ii. Typically convened for multiple meetings. May range from a
            few months to multiple years.

        iii. Can involve parties outside of fishing interests.

b.  *Purpose*:

    -   For either ad hoc or standing advisory groups, the purpose is to
        solicit input from a group of individuals representative of
        larger interest groups (i.e., environmental NGOs, fishing
        industry, regulators, etc.) collaboratively to support
        development of solutions to policy challenges.

c.  *Timing*:

    -   Early or late planning

    -   During ongoing program activities in anticipation of future
        policy or regulatory changes

d.  *Required resources*:

    -   Staffing: High

    <!-- -->

    -   Staffing assignments are largely dependent on the size of the
        group in question. For smaller advisory groups, a single staff
        member, one support staff, and one group facilitator may
        be sufficient. Larger groups may require additional staff to
        support group activities.

    <!-- -->

    -   Budget: High (assuming at least 4 Advisory Group meetings)

    <!-- -->

    -   Cost will depend on the number of meetings and the complexity of
        the advisory process.

    -   Third party neutral, professional facilitation is critical.

e.  *Required skills*:

    -   In depth understanding of the scientific, regulatory,
        management, and economic background of the fishery
        management issue.

    -   Facilitation and mediation experience (note: in contentious
        cases, third-party neutral facilitation is advised).

    -   Event planning or logistics support experience is beneficial.

f.  *Keys to success*:

    -   Third-party, neutral facilitation can be immensely helpful in
        achieving consensus and efficient decision-making in advisory
        group settings. This allows agency staff to focus on their role
        as fisheries managers without also trying to manage group
        dynamics or give the appearance of being allied with one side or
        another in a policy dispute.

    -   Stakeholder advisory groups can be labor intensive, relatively
        expensive, and require a significant commitment on the part of
        both fisheries managers and the stakeholder participants.
        Therefore, clear roles and commitments need to be established at
        the onset of the process to streamline engagement (e.g., with
        a Charter).

    -   For long standing advisory groups or committees, it is important
        that as stakeholder membership shifts and new members come into
        the group, they agree not to re-open previously closed
        discussions barring any significant physical or regulatory
        changes impacting the fishery. This provides the existing
        membership with assurances that existing agreements won’t be
        jeopardized if a new stakeholder joins the group.

g.  *Legal considerations*:

    -   Multiple, depending on the membership of the group. If public
        officials are seated members of the advisory group, it may be
        subject to the Federal Advisory Committee Act (FACA), the Brown
        Act, Bagley-Keene, and other “sunshine” statutes and regulation
        as described in Figure 4 above.

h.  *Evaluation*:

    -   Evaluate whether the advisory group achieved the desired policy
        outcomes in the time allotted. This can be done with mid-course
        or post-process survey evaluations.

    -   Review whether all deliverables and assignments (by staff
        and stakeholders) are completed on time and on budget.

    -   Survey participants to evaluate the fairness and efficacy of
        group facilitation and their perceptions of the process.

<!-- -->

1.  <span id="_Toc425172596" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299115233"
    class="anchor"><span id="_Toc307053386"
    class="anchor"></span></span></span>**Surveys**

<!-- -->

a.  *Description*: An evaluation or information collection technique
    > consisting of a series of questions designed to solicit opinions
    > from stakeholders on specific fisheries management issues and/or
    > to collect data (e.g., human dimensions of the fishery
    > or otherwise). Surveys can be distributed online (e.g., using
    > tools like SurveyMonkey) or via hard copy (to be completed
    > in-person or mailed by the respondent at a later date).

b.  *Purpose*:

-   Surveys solicit input on a specific topic, such as evaluating the
    socioeconomic demographics of a fishery or soliciting feedback on a
    proposal for a management alternative, from a targeted list
    of stakeholders.

a.  *Timing*:

-   Early or late planning

-   During implementation

-   Provided on an ongoing basis to solicit input on a specific aspect
    of fisheries management

a.  *Required resources*:

-   Staffing: Low

    -   4-16 hours to design, implement, and compile the results of a
        survey (depending on the complexity and target audience of
        the survey).

-   Budget: Low

    -   While some online survey tools are free, a Surveymonkey Pro
        account costs between \$300 and \$500 per year.

a.  *Required skills*:

-   Knowledge of the fishery management issue by participating staff.

-   Expertise in crafting appropriate (e.g., non-leading)
    survey questions.

-   Familiarity with survey design tools like SurveyMonkey (for
    online surveys).

a.  *Keys to success*:

-   The approach to developing survey questions is not meant to be
    overly prescriptive: in some cases, questions with easily
    quantifiable answers may be preferred to more open-ended,
    qualitative questions. However, in many cases qualitative questions
    may provide richer responses to specific questions.

-   Questions should be as specific as possible to solicit
    desired information. Often times, multiple choice or “rating”
    questions are easier to analyze, especially if using an online
    platform such as Surveymonkey.

-   The same staff member should review all survey responses to ensure
    consistent interpretation of data.

a.  *Evaluation*:

-   Monitor the survey response rate and the distribution channels that
    have the most response returns.

1.  <span id="_Toc425172597" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299115234"
    class="anchor"><span id="_Toc307053387"
    class="anchor"></span></span></span>**Tackle Shops and Fuel Dock –
    Information Sharing**

    a.  *Description*: Tackle shops are private businesses that may be
        frequented by both recreational and commercial fishermen. They
        are located throughout the California coast. Management
        information in the form of flyers or brochures can be placed at
        the check-out counter or storefront of tackle shops to
        disseminate details to stakeholders that are not
        electronically connected. : Fuel docks are private businesses
        that are commonly frequented by both recreational and
        commercial fishermen. They are located at ports and marinas
        along the California coast. Management information in the form
        of flyers or brochures can be posted and disseminated at fuel
        docks to reach stakeholders that may not be
        electronically connected.

    b.  *Purpose*:

-   Distribute timely information efficiently to a broad
    stakeholder audience. Sharing messages in this fashion is
    particularly helpful when the stakeholder groups are undefined,
    speak a different language, or are difficult to reach using
    electronic methods.

    a.  *Timing*:

<!-- -->

-   Printed information in tackle shops or fuel docks can be used to
    circulate relevant or timely information to stakeholders at any
    point in the decision-making process, or on an ad hoc basis.

    a.  *Required resources:*

<!-- -->

-   Staffing: Low

    -   1-5% staff FTE to develop, vet and distribute flyers.

-   Budget: Low

    -   \$100-1,000 to print flyers.

    a.  *Required skills*:

<!-- -->

-   Agency staff must have the ability to design and post timely
    messages that reflect agency perspectives and values.

-   Visual and graphic design skills.

-   Clear and concise written communication skills.

    a.  *Keys to success*:

    -   Ensure information is printed in languages appropriate to
        fishery audiences.

    -   Use engaging visuals and stories.

    -   Include contact information or links so that stakeholders can
        follow-up as interested.

    a.  *Evaluation*:

<!-- -->

-   Track which and how many communication materials are collected from
    tackle shops or fuel docks.

1.  <span id="_Toc425172598" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299115235"
    class="anchor"><span id="_Toc307053388"
    class="anchor"></span></span></span>**Town Hall-Style Meetings**

    a.  *Description*: Different from listening sessions, town halls are
        open, public meetings often structured around a brief
        presentation on a specific topic followed by time for questions.

    b.  *Purpose*:

-   Town halls give stakeholders an opportunity to speak freely about a
    specific or general issue of management concern. They can also be
    structured to disseminate information to a geographically-specific
    stakeholder community.

    a.  *Timing: *

-   Town hall meetings are best used during a rulemaking process or
    while implementing a management policy to disseminate information
    and clarify uncertainties among geographically-specific communities.

    a.  *Required resources (annually): *

<!-- -->

-   Staffing: Low

    -   5% staff FTE to plan and implement the town hall.

    -   1-2 additional staff to participate in the event itself.

-   Budget: Low

    -   \$500 for travel costs for staff, depending on location, and any
        meeting materials.

    a.  *Required skills*:

<!-- -->

-   Strong process design and facilitation skills.

-   Knowledge of the current rulemaking processes by
    participating staff.

-   Oral communication and interpersonal skills.

    a.  *Keys to success*:

-   Facilitators must be equipped to manage difficult or
    lengthy commentary.

    a.  *Evaluation*:

<!-- -->

-   Monitor the number of individuals who attend.

-   Monitor the number of written comments or feedback received.

-   Consider asking participants to complete a short survey before
    leaving to collect feedback on the format and efficacy of the
    town hall.

1.  <span id="_Toc425172599" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299115236"
    class="anchor"><span id="_Toc307053389"
    class="anchor"></span></span></span>**Trade Shows **

<!-- -->

a.  *Description: Trade shows are periodic events (typically annual)
    that bring together gear suppliers and fishermen (commercial
    and recreational). Agency staff can host a booth at trade shows to
    disseminate general information about and increase visibility of
    agency structure, process, and activities. *

b.  *Purpose: *

-   Trade show booths can be used to target underrepresented stakeholder
    groups in conversation, distribute information about agency
    processes, and generally build trust and visibility among the
    general public. They are a good opportunity for agency staff to
    engage in informal, one-on-one discussion with interested fishermen.

a.  *Timing: *

-   Agency presence at trade shows is appropriate at any point in the
    management process.

a.  *Required resources:*

-   Staffing: Low

    -   2-10% staff FTE to plan and attend trade shows, depending
        on frequency.

-   Budget: Low

    -   \$500-3,000 for travel costs for staff, depending on location,
        and any communication materials for dissemination and
        booth banners.

a.  *Required skills*:

-   The ability to effectively engage trade show attendees.

-   Oral communication and interpersonal skills.

a.  *Keys to success*:

-   Engaging materials and visuals to attract traffic to the booth
    (e.g., the fisheries agency of one state created fishery management
    coloring books for children).

-   The attending staff are comfortable with engaging strangers and
    highly personable.

a.  *Evaluation*:

-   Monitor the number of individuals who stop at the booth.

-   Monitor the amount of communication materials taken or requested.

1.  <span id="_Toc425172600" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299115237"
    class="anchor"><span id="_Toc307053390"
    class="anchor"></span></span></span>**Webinar Meetings**

<!-- -->

a.  *Description: Webinars are virtual meetings with auditory and visual
    components that allow participants to share information and dialogue
    across distances. *

b.  *Purpose: *

-   Webinars can be used to communicate management options early in the
    rulemaking process, educate stakeholders about a particular issue,
    or electronically stream public meetings. More advanced webinars
    utilizing platforms such as Adobe Connect allow for breakout groups,
    instant polling, and other innovative tools to provide a high degree
    of stakeholder input and collaboration in virtual meetings.

a.  *Timing: *

-   Webinars can be appropriate at any point in the management process.

a.  *Required resources:*

-   Staffing: Low

    -   5% staff FTE to design, market, and manage a quarterly webinar,
        plus staff time for individual presentation development and
        implementation per webinar.

-   Budget: Low

    -   \$300-1,000 for webinar software program subscriptions

a.  *Required skills*:

-   Clear and articulate verbal communication skills.

-   Process design, facilitation and technical skills for managing a
    virtual group of stakeholders.

a.  *Keys to success*:

-   Agency staff spotlight or engage agency leadership in webinars to
    promote visibility and trust-building among interested stakeholders.

-   Agency staff stream public meetings through a webinar format to
    efficiently increase viewership and accessibility of meetings to
    underrepresented stakeholders (e.g., by mitigating travel costs).

-   Agency staff use engaging visuals and outline talking points ahead
    of time.

-   To the extent possible, agency staff use interactivity to engage the
    audience, including polling, small-group breakouts if the software
    supports this functionality, or virtual ‘roundtables.’

-   Agency staff or consultants must ensure their electronic networks
    have the bandwidth to support webinars. Large webinars may require
    high bandwidth; any internet problems on the host’s end result in
    significant latency issues and a negative user experience.

a.  *Evaluation*:

-   Monitor the number of participants on each webinar.

-   Monitor the number of questions and comments raised on each webinar
    to evaluate the level of engagement, as well as any follow-ups
    (e.g., email, phone calls).

-   Use surveys to evaluate changes in participants’ perceptions of the
    topic of the webinar or of the agency.

1.  <span id="_Toc425172601" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299115238"
    class="anchor"><span id="_Toc307053391"
    class="anchor"></span></span></span>**Websites**

<!-- -->

a.  *Description*: Websites are internet sites where organizations can
    share structured and searchable information.

b.  *Purpose*:

-   Websites inform a large number of stakeholders about agency
    structure, process, and activities.

-   Websites can have varying degrees of interactivity, with online
    comment sections, videos, live feeds, or links to other methods of
    engagement (e.g., blogs, newsletters, documents, etc.).

a.  *Timing*:

    Websites are appropriate at any point in the management process.

b.  *Required resources:*

-   Staffing: Medium

    -   25-75% staff FTE to maintain the website, generate material, and
        solicit material from agency staff.

-   Budget: Low

    -   \$20,000-100,000 for accessible, tailored, user-friendly
        website design.

a.  *Required skills*:

-   The ability to design and post timely messages that reflect agency
    perspectives and values.

-   Clear and concise written communication skills.

<!-- -->

-   The ability to update and maintain website material on a
    timely basis.

a.  *Keys to success*:

-   Agency staff conduct timely updates to website material to reflect
    current processes and agency activities.

-   Agency staff invest significantly early to ensure website is
    accessible and tailored to fishery stakeholders.

-   A clear and timely vetting process is established within the agency
    to review and edit the website material in advance of updates.

a.  *Evaluation*:

-   Use Google Analytics to monitor website use, including from which
    websites users find the agency website, which pages are most and
    least frequented, and in which forms of interactivity users engage.

-   Use surveys to evaluate how people use or frequent the website.<span
    id="_Ref292091129" class="anchor"></span>

1.  <span id="_Toc425172602" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299115239"
    class="anchor"><span id="_Toc307053392"
    class="anchor"></span></span></span>**Workshops**

<!-- -->

a.  *Description*: In-person meetings (one hour to two days) that are
    informal, problem-solving focused, interactive, and often involve a
    combination of small group and plenary discussions.

b.  *Purpose: *

-   Workshops provide fisheries managers and stakeholders with the
    opportunity to interact directly with each other in a small group
    format as well as in a standard, plenary format.

-   Workshops are useful spaces for brainstorming, sharing ideas,
    joint-problem solving, and building trust and relationships.

a.  *Timing: *

-   Early or late planning

-   As part of ongoing engagement throughout the life of a project or
    regulation

a.  *Required resources: *

-   Staffing: Medium

    -   Workshops tend to be staff intensive events although the effort
        may only be required over 2-3 months. One fisheries manager, two
        to three support staff, and outside consultant assistance may be
        desired depending on the scope and scale of the event.

-   Funding: Medium (assuming conducting more than one workshop around
    the state)

    -   Likely will require use of external contractors.

    -   Hiring a consultant to plan and facilitate a full-day workshop
        can range from \$5,000-10,000.

a.  *Required skills*:

-   Process design and large and small group facilitation skills
    are preferable.

-   Logistics and event planning expertise is beneficial.

a.  *Keys to success*:

-   A well-developed facilitation plan is important for clearly defining
    all staff roles and responsibilities.

-   Workshops should generally be noticed (via target listservs, key
    communicators, and other methods discussed above) at least three
    weeks in advance. Outreach reminders tend to be helpful in
    boosting attendance.

a.  *Evaluation*:

-   Use surveys of participants to evaluate the efficacy of
    facilitation, changes in perception of the agency, and what
    information participants are taking away.

1.  <span id="_Toc425172603" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc299115240"
    class="anchor"><span id="_Toc307053393"
    class="anchor"></span></span></span>**Written Public Comment**

<!-- -->

a.  *Description*: Written public comment is an opportunity for members
    of the public to provide input (e.g., via email, letter, or website)
    on draft policy and regulatory documents. This can take place as
    part of a formal regulatory process; resource managers can also
    solicit written comments on draft materials or concepts in the
    pre-regulatory phase.

b.  *Purpose*:

-   Public comment provides fisheries managers or agency staff with a
    formal written record of public opinion on a regulatory process.

-   Public comment provides stakeholders with an opportunity to provide
    input to inform management decisions, both early in planning
    processes and during formal regulatory processes as well.

a.  *Timing*:

-   Early or late planning, and during the formal regulatory process.

a.  *Required resources*:

-   Staffing: Low to Medium

    -   Staff time for written public comment is entirely dependent on
        the number of comments received and on whether fisheries
        managers plan to or are required to respond to the comments
        (this acknowledges that agencies cannot always respond to
        all comments). For large scale or contentious processes,
        consider dedicating at least 10% FTE. This includes development
        and maintenance of a comment catalogue system database.

    -   At a minimum, one staffer or project/regulatory lead and one
        support staff or consultant to manage, catalogue, and respond to
        public comments as they come in. Resource managers often
        contract these services out to an outside consulting firm.

-   Budget: Medium (assuming work is contracted out)

    -   For larger projects, likely will require use of
        external consultant.

    <!-- -->

    -   Assumes consultant would manage, catalogue, and respond to
        public comments as they come in.

a.  *Required skills*:

-   Analytical skills to synthesize public comments.

a.  *Keys to success*:

-   Provide the public with sufficient time to review the draft
    decision documents.

-   For complex issues, provide a comment guide to facilitate
    preparation of written comments.

-   Set clear expectations as to whether and how agency staff will be
    responding to individual comments and to how the agency will be
    addressing and incorporating the comments received.

-   Encourage original written comments (as opposed to form letters).

a.  *Legal considerations*:

-   The MLMA requires that the Department post proposed plans, plan
    amendments, hearing schedules, and agendas on the Department website
    and stakeholders must have the chance to review and submit comments
    on the management plan. When involved in the peer review process,
    the Department is required to make all comments made by stakeholders
    available to the peer review panel.[^2]

-   CEQA requires that the public be allowed time to comment on the
    reports and the effects the project may have on the environment.
    These comments must be sought and received early and often
    throughout the project planning process to afford timely
    identification of the potential effects of the project, means for
    mitigation, and any possible alternatives.[^3] The Department and
    Commission must allow at least 45 days for public review of a
    negative declaration[^4] or environmental impact report.[^5] After
    comments are submitted, the lead agency must take the comments into
    consideration and make revisions accordingly.[^6]

a.  *Evaluation*:

-   Count the number of original comments received.

*III. Glossary *
================

\[To be completed once user manual is finalized\]

[^1]: Note that most regulatory, California Endangered Species Act, and
    Endangered Species Act proceedings may be subject to Public Records
    Act and Freedom of Information Act requests.

[^2]: Cal. Fish & Game Code § 7077

[^3]: Cal. Pub. Res. Code § 21003.1(a).

[^4]: Cal. Code Regs. tit. 14 § 763.

[^5]: Cal. Code Regs. tit. 14 § 770.

[^6]: Cal. Pub. Res. Code § 21091(d).
